For my first test, I will be answering the question, “What type of opioids are people dying from the most and how are they obtained?” with a Pearson Correlation test. My null hypothesis is that there is no significant linear correlation between unintentional overdose and a certain drug, and my alternate hypothesis is that there is a significant linear correlation between unintentional overdose and a certain drug. They all came out to have a p-value between .9 and 1. This shows an extremely insignificant correlation. That means I cannot reject the null hypothesis. As to how they are obtained, there is no significant drug to focus on, but the violin plot gives us an idea of distribution and frequency, with illegal opioids being the most frequent, then Rx opioids, and then the least frequent source being counterfeit pills. This was shocking to me considering how many more para-fluorofentanyl deaths there were in my boxplot. Frequency does not equal significance, so I can conclude that if we were to focus on eradicating an opioid from the market, there likely would not be much of an impact on overdose rate.

My next test answered the question, “What are the markers of an at-risk person to fall into opioid use disorder?” with a Chi-square Test of Independence. This tests for significant association between two categorical variables. My variables were originally stored as 1 for yes and 2 for no, so first I converted those to categorical values. Then I tested 35 columns, or markers, against the variable OPINMYR, which indicates whether the respondent has misused opioids in the past year. My null hypothesis is that there is no significant relationship between a specific marker and misusing opioids, and my alternate hypothesis is that there is a significant relationship between a specific marker and misusing opioids. Eight variables satisfied my alternate hypothesis: arrested for drug possession or sale (p-value: 0.00), health score (p-value: 0.00), family receives any government assistance (p-value: 0.00), family receives food stamps (p-value: 0.00), arrested for a DUI (p-value: 0.02), family receives public assistance (p-value: 0.02), wouldn’t work for a company that tests pre-hiring (p-value: 0.02), and family receives welfare or childcare (p-value: 0.04). There is a big trend between people who misuse opioids and receive any form of government assistance. There is also a significant relationship between opioid misuse and having been arrested for drug possession or sale or a DUI. Targeting and providing some type of treatment or prevention resources to people in custody regarding substances could make an impact on addiction and overdose rate, provided the method is effective.

I then conducted an OLS model to answer the question, “What are common circumstances surrounding overdose deaths?” I compared 15 circumstances against the rate of unintentional opioid overdoses. I found 7 significant variables: Ever previously overdosed (p-value: 0.00), previously overdosed within a month (p-value: 0.00), currently in SUD treatment (p-value: 0.00), evidence of illegal drug use (p-value: 0.01), ever been in mental health or SUD treatment (p-value: 0.02), recently released from a treatment facility (p-value: 0.02), and had an opportunity for prevention (p-value: 0.02). This continues to reinforce the conclusion that there is a significant failing in the system. The three lowest p-values are for variables that indicate they were likely in the care of a facility or hospital. Despite being in a situation to get help for their substance use disorder, these people still went on to die of an overdose. All the indications for being in treatment, whether that is at any point, recently, or currently, have a significant relationship with people who died of an opioid overdose. Of course, this could reflect more on the severity of the patient's condition, that they were put in treatment because they were almost “too far gone.” However, I don’t believe that should be an excuse to write these findings off as unimportant. It is the job of treatment facilities to give their patients skills to cope both in and out of treatment. We should work to improve the system so people who receive treatment are actually able to stop using opioids.

When discussing solutions to the opioid crisis, naloxone, or better known as Narcan, is always suggested. I wanted to see if naloxone distribution actually has a significant impact on overdose rates. I conducted a Pearson Correlation test to look for significant correlation. My null hypothesis is that there is no significant correlation between opioid overdose rate and naloxone distribution, and the alternate hypothesis is that there is a significant correlation between opioid overdose rate and naloxone distribution. The p-value came out to be 0.1, meaning I failed to reject the null hypothesis. There is no significant correlation. I plotted the regression line, and as you can see, the points are quite random. There is a slight positive relationship indicating naloxone is being distributed more in response to overdoses, but distribution is not bringing the rate of overdoses down. This may not be fully indicative of naloxone failing, but rather that the line is relatively horizontal because states are generally meeting their needs at the right amount. A negative relationship sounds ideal when looking at high distribution rates being met with low overdose rates. However, that would require states with high overdoses having some of the lowest distribution rates. While that would allow us to better show a relationship, it is a good sign there are not a significant amount of states seeming to fail to combat opioid overdoses. SUDORS indicated that 22% of overdose deaths were administered naloxone prior to dying. Naloxone reports to be 75 to 100% effective, so this number is within normal range. That 22% could be attributed to user error, administering the treatment too late, the overdose being nonopioid related, or the person not immediately going to the hospital after.

Finally, I wanted to put these findings into the context of Montgomery County and find correlation in where these trends are being perpetuated and where we need to focus efforts. I used GIS in Python to create an interactive map that will tell you how many opioid-related arrests have been made in a given zip code and city since 2017. Both red zones and the surrounding orange zones to the east side belong to Silver Spring. For some reason, one of the sources I included does not recognize Wheaton, but it is the orange section between the two red zones. The next hotspots occur around Rockville, Gaithersburg, and Germantown. According to Data Commons out of 50 cities in Montgomery County, Silver Spring is ranked 47th in median household income, Wheaton is 43rd, Gaithersburg is 41st, Germantown is 37th, and Rockville is 32nd. This seems to support the correlation we found between opioid misuse and government assistance. This suggests that these areas should receive more funding and resources to provide care and help to those they arrest because they are especially high risk to die of an overdose.
